
1. Introduction

Relative to other large technology companies, IBM has been fairly active in the blockchain space. Their dedication to blockchain is reflected in a number of papers that have been published in the IBM Journal of Research and Development. This report will look at four such papers, all published in 2019. 

Probably the most active area of development within IBM related to blockchain is contained within the Hyperledger project. Hyperledger is an open source, cross-industry collaboration hosted by the Linux Foundation. IBM was one of the pioneers of this initiative and their stamp is most notably seen on Hyperledger Fabric. Hyperledger Fabric is a plug and play blockchain solution and is the framework behind IBM's blockchain platform. Components in Fabric like consensus and memebership services can be replaced and it is Fabric's modular architecture which has helped the project garner a considerable amount of attention. 

Unlike public blockchain networks like Bitcoin and Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric is meant to be deployed in a permissioned, semi-trusted environment. Fabric is seen as a good solution for cross-industry applications like those related to providing bank to bank financial services. In an environment like this you have participants that may not completely trust each other with concerns relating to privacy, accountability and security. Only semi-trusted entities approved by other members in the network would be allowed to join and view the shared, distributed ledger or blockchain. Permissioned blockchain solutions are ideal for these types of scenarios and the benefits of using a dedicated blockchain platform can not be replicated by any type of shared database. 

One widely talked about use case for permissioned blockchains - like IBM's Hyperledger Fabric - relates to the area of supply chain management. Putting a class of products on a blockchain like say diamonds may have different requirements than those involved with bank to bank financial services. A supply chain blockchain may be publicly viewable as consumers' have an interest in the authenticity of a product. Bank to bank transactions, on the other hand, would most likely only be viewable by other banks and maybe some government auditing agencies. One paper that will be looked at here relates directly to the issue of supply chain management with a focus on automating what they call high-volume tasks involving reconciliations, payments, and settlements [1].

Another notable use case for blockchain technology that has received some attention is in the distriibution of health care data. Privacy concerns here are much more stringent than those involved with supply chain management. Health care data needs to be treated with the utmost care and concern as a person's health care records should only be viewable by trusted care providers. These trusted care providers should additionally only be allowed to view the portion of an individual's health care record that directly relates to any condition that is being examined and has consent associated with it. Ideally access would be time managed and not available to a health care provider after a treatment has finished. Using cryptography a patient can digitally sign transactions that allow a provider temporary access to a portion of their medical history. Securing health care data on IBM's Hyperledger Fabric solution is looked at carefully in [3] and this is another paper being covered here. 

A blockchain is essentially a provenance solution. It stores the history of all transactions in a network whether we are talking about currency with Bitcoin or recording when a diamond was mined in Namibia using something like Hyperledger Fabric. Blockchains depending on their use case can potentially contain enormous amounts of valuable data. Examining a blockchain may lead to things like identifying issues in supply chains related to noncompliance with respect to regulatory rules and obligations. Blockchain technology and analytics using machine learning can walk hand in hand because data put into a blockchain needs to be specificially formatted. Tools relating to analytics using artificial intelligence is covered in another paper [2] being reviewed here. 

The fourth and last paper covered in this review and titled, "Crypto anchors" [5] looks at an often overlooked aspect related to the concrete implementation of blockchains for many tasks. The movement of goods and products can be traced digitally and recorded in a blockchain for austerity and security but how do these items maintain authenticity? For an item to be reliably tracked it needs to have identification associated with it originating in the physical domain when it is first produced. One can trace the movement of their Rolex watch from Hong Kong to Vancouver but what guarantee does one have that it is a genuine Rolex watch in the first place. Even if you can see the watch originating from a genuine factory via reviewing the associated blockchain how can you be sure that it was not replaced with a fake at some point in the supply chain? By reviewing [5] some of the ideas and challenges associated with this idea will be considered. 

2. Supply Chain Automation

According to Narayanaswami et al [4], there are many challenges involved with increasing blockchain adoption in a suppy chain setting. Business, management, operational, and technical challenges are all addressed in their paper. One area related to business is in designing incentive mechanisms to ensure participation. A key issue related to operational concerns is authentification outside of the blockchain, specifically before data is entered. Once a product is entered into the blockchain it can be reliably traced but what assurances do we have that it is a real diamond or a a product that has been say, certified organic. One partial solution for this is provided by the idea of 'BlockTags'. A BlockTag would be an embeddable electronic tag with optional sensors attached to physical objects to help reliably trace provenance. The authors state that BlockTags would only address provenance and introduce the idea of using analytics combined with AI to, "detect anomalies, correct for outliers, interpolate and project for missing data etc." [4]. By doing this, faulty BlockTags could also be potentially identified. 

Technical challenges related to supply chains and blockchain technology identified by Narayanaswami et al [4] include solving scalability or transaction throughput issues, hardware acceleration for data encryption and dealing with the ever-increasing size of the blockchain itself. Transaction scalability is a well-know issue facing blockchain networks. Multi-enterprise loads in a blockchain setting may need to process several hundreds of transactions per minute according to the authors. This is not hard to believe. Blockchain networks are notoriously slow although setups like IBM's Hyperledger Fabric are still considerably faster than public, proof-of-work ones like Bitcoin or Ethereum. Identifying the need to accelerate data encryption is an interesting point. For many blockchain solutions, data submitted to the blockchain needs to be encrypted. Using hardware encryption is a solution but it is not quite clear from reading this paper [4] if it is an immediately viable one or not. 

Blockchain size management is another idea that has been floating around the blockchain community for quite some time. Over time a blockchain could theoretically grow quite large. Solutions to this issue, identified by Narayanaswami et al [4] include truncation and, "building associated logging and indexes to enable faster access." How to implement solutions to manage this issue is still an open question in the blockchain space. One other challenge identified here [4] involves consensus. The authors state that more attention has to be paid to the algorithms that establish consensus before data is written into the blockchain" [4]. Consensus needs to be clearly defined as it relates to how participants may join or leave the network which could affect things like voting and other governance issues. How would entities be allowed access to a supply chain network? Would there be a central agency that would approve all membership changes potentially removing particiapnts involved in certain areas of the world that conflict with another countries political ideas?

The last idea introduced in [4] is yet another one that has garnered a fair amount of attention and for good reason. Establishing a system for blockchain interoperability could have an enormous impact. In a supply chain setting, members of one network would naturally need to be able to send and receive information to other networks. Besides for the technical issues involved with passing secure transactions between blockchain networks there is the need for data consistency to allow for this to happen in the first place. Even if two supply chains utilize the same blockchain implementation - like Hyperledger Fabric - there is still a need for cross-industry standards to be established. Another issue in this scenario, that is presented in [4], is that of authenticating membership credentials. Managing membership is one network may be difficult but how about across networks? Who authenticates membership? A federated model would probably work best here because it could be based on a quorum or circle of trust and allow for membership to be approved without central agency.  

3. Blockchain for HCLS (Health Care and Life Sciences)

In [3] the authors focus on tasks related to healthcare data exchange, payments, clinical trials and the pharmaceutical supply chain. Curbera et al. believe that blockchain has the potential to disrupt current industry practices in the area of health care and life sciences (HCLS). They state that blockchain is the, "ideal technology to support major requirements for emerging healthcare and life sciences (HCLS) trends." The volume of health care data contained in electronic format is rapidy expanding. Most electronic health records (EHR) are universally available [3]. With the advent of precision medicine combined with falling costs for genome sequencing, personal genomics data is becoming more and more accesible. Another area of data is called 'exogenous' data and this type of data is harvested from, "consumer-grade wearable devices and data related to social determinants of health" [3]. 

In an HCLS environment, a blockchain contains a full record of consent requests, authorization, and data exchange. Data integrity, provenance, patient/owner consent, and privacy are all concerns here. Every node in the health care network as proposed in [3] would need to run in an environment enabled by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). There are 59 controls required by the HIPAA. The HIPAA also requires Key Management Services (KMS), User Management Services (UMS), and Log Management Services (LMS). 

With HCLS data, providing patient consent is a requirement. Curbera et al state that, "Leveraging patient consent to make patient data available through the healthcare system requires a secure, globally accessible system of record" [3]. Patient consent needs to exist on very specific terms which involves the portion of a patient's health record that is being requested, the reasons for the request and the date that the authorization for access expires. In this system a patient could revoke access at any time and have a full record available to them detailing the history of all access provided. A shared, immutable ledger like that provided by a blockchain tailored specifically to this use case could theoretically provide the perfect backbone. 

The authors of [3] extend the use case looked at above - related to patient consent - to 'owner-mediated health data exchange'. Owner-mediated health data could extend to the exchange of data or even datasets owned by third parties. Examples could include data from a clinical trial or de-identified patient data. Large datasets like those say related to genomics data can be exchanged via smart contracts. A hash of the data along with associated pointers are stored in the blockchain while the data itself is encrypted and split into chunks and stored elsewhere. After a contract is negotiated, metadata is released and the data requestor can then download and decrypt the data. 

A system is proposed in [3] built on top of IBM's Hyperledger Fabric solution. A full description of this architecture is beyond the scope of this review. Some of the technical challenges that remain afterwards and are identified relate to privacy and security of data, scalability, and speed.

Concerning security, Curbera et al state that, "Hyperledger's native data encryption scheme is not sufficient since it does not allow defining fine-grain visibility rules per data element and per user" [3]. HIPAA regulations in the United States and similar schemes in other jurisdictions have specific data privacy requirements. The authors [3] seek to address this by adding an extra layer of data encryption. Every piece of data is encrypted with a data key for extra protection. They also use private channels which are implemented in Hyperledger Fabric to provide security during the exchange of possibly sensitive data. 

With respect to scalability, the authors of [3] point out that a blockchain by design stores a copy of all data on every node in the network which naturally inhibits scalability. There solution solves this problem by splitting data into chunks and using encryption. Only metadata related to the data itself along with a hash of the data for integrity is stored on-chain. They claim that by doing this they solve the problem of scalability. There are maybe a couple of concerns here. One is that storing data off-chain is not a new solution. What they propose has been implemented before. The second concern would be that, as other blockchains have shown, eventually a blockchain will become cumbersome even without storing gigabytes of exogenous data directly on the blockchain. The Bitcoin blockchain for instance is 149 GB is size and doesn't directly store any datasets either. A secure, global system storing references to all health care data along with a full audit trail detailing all access could face similar bloat. 

Speed in a blockchain setting relates to scalability. The authors of [3] believe that Hyperledger Fabric is basically fast enough on it's own and any speed concerns in their system could potentially be addressed by tweaking settings in Fabric such as those that relate to the number of endorsing peers needed to approve transactions. Curbera et al. note that the extra layer of encryption could add to latency but believe that this can be addressed by hardware encryption. 

A concern here might be related to the fact that Hyperledger Fabric has never been implemented in a setting similar to the one proposed for HCLS data. They claim that the amount of health care data in the world is expanding rapidly but if this trend continues in the future the number of transactions involved with exchanging this data will increase as well. Whether Hyperledger Fabric can support this type of load is an unanswered question as it had not faced any similar real life scale yet. The security provided by Hyperledger Fabric may need to be revisited as well in this type of scenario. At some point it might be better to just host a public blockchain with stronger security guarantees like what is offered by proof-of-work blockchains based on the Bitcoin protocol. Further challenges identified by Curbera et al. relate to multi-blockchain environments, standardization of key blockchain services for HCLS data and providing building blocks to enable other industries to adopt their solution. 

4. Blockchain Analytics and Artificial Intelligence  

With a blockchain presently proposed for almost every facet of modern life, a new opportunity is introduced. Analyzing vast amounts of new data, already specifically formatted to exist in targeted use-case environments is now a potentially, exciting area of research. In the paper 'Blockchain analytics and artificial intelligence' [2], some of the uses for data analytics relating to blockchain technology are identified which include provenance history, predictive planning, fraud identification, and regulatory compliance. A vital point made by Dillenberger et al. that cannot be overlooked, is that analytics, "need to follow the same access control and security model as the underlying blockchain platform" [2]. With the proliferation of permissioned or private and semi-private blockchain solutions, privacy and security becomes a real concern versus analyzing data on public, permission-less blockchain solutions like Bitcoin where the same concerns do not exist. The authors of [2] have presented a solution built on top of Hyperledger Fabric, which is the same framework used by the other papers in this review related to healthcare and supply chain management. One of the properties that they have tried to incorporate is what they call 'solution-independent' meaning that there framework should work for any system built on top of Hyperledger Fabric. 

Hyperledger Fabric has not been designed with analytics in mind, the authors of [2] propose performing the necessary queries on a secondary database that is used with Fabric to store the latest snapshots of data. Because Fabric is modular, both LevelDB and CouchDB are presently supported. The authors chose CouchDB because it supports JSON retrieval and has richer query capabilities than LevelDB. 

A very important use case for performing analytics on blockchain data and identified by Dillenberger et al. [2] relates to compliance analysis. The concept of compliance analysis references general auditing tasks like risk identification, violations and fraud. There are often contractual, legal, regulatory and other types of complex rules that need to be monitored and enforced in different blockchain scenarios. The validity of data before it is introduced to the blockchain can be checked with smart contracts. As a ledger for all related events, a blockchain is the perfect vehicle allowing for consistent auditing related to ensuring compliance. An example of this would be with maintaing, 'know your customers' (KYC) records for financial transactions. 

To enable compliance analysis the authors [2] designed a Compliance Engine for auditing data built on the Hyperledger Fabric framework. Rules are translated to logical expressions which evaluate to either True of False representing compliance or non-compliance. Non-compliant assets can be stored for further analysis potentially utilizing machine-learning to identify patterns. 

Another idea introduced by [2] relates to trusted AI. With AI processing becoming more distributed and with AI in general increasing in popularity, Dillenberger et al. believe that blockchain can help address associated trust-related concerns. The idea here is that a blockchain, because it is an immutable ledger, can help "to track a given AI process at different granularity levels, depending on the application at hand" [2]. Other blockchain mechanisms especially those in Hyperledger Fabric can help restrict access to data and data models. This allows for confidential sharing and tracing usage and ownership across complex provenance chains [2].

5. Crypto Anchors














6. References  

1.	Dillenberger, D. N., et al. "Blockchain analytics and artificial intelligence." IBM Journal of Research and Development 63.2/3 (2019): 5-1. (3 citations)
2.	Tateishi, T., et al. "Automatic smart contract generation using controlled natural language and template." IBM Journal of Research and Development 63.2/3 (2019): 6-1. (1 citation)
3.	Curbera, F., et al. "Blockchain: An enabler for healthcare and life sciences transformation." IBM Journal of Research and Development 63.2/3 (2019): 8-1. (1 citation)
4.  Narayanaswami, C., et al. "Blockchain anchored supply chain automation." IBM Journal of Research and Development 63.2/3 (2019): 7-1. 
5.  Balagurusamy, V. S. K., et al. "Crypto anchors." IBM Journal of Research and Development 63.2/3 (2019): 4-1.
 

